#  Analysis of Dynamics of Sea Otter Population in California for Guiding Conservational Efforts
#### Authors
> Jui-Chia Chung
> Aman Mohanty

## Abstract

Southern sea otters in California are extremely cute and important for maintaining a balanced ecosystem. This report aims to understand the dynamics of sea otter population in California by analyzing data about census, stranding cases and mortality in sea otters. We want to understand the sea otter population both chronologically and geographically by asking main questions about the general trend over the years and geographical distributions of both living population and stranded sea otters. We also addressed important questions including the what are leading causes of death in sea otters across sex and age class distribution. Our results suggest that though the sea otter population is increasing over the past decades from 1985-2014, population size (~ 3000 in year 2015) is still small according to Red List criterion [[5, 9]](#References). Habitats with better environment and conservational efforts, such as Monetery Bay National Marine Sanctuary, demonstrates tremendous increase in sea otter population over time. There is also an increasing trend of stranded sea otter counts and more stranded sea otters were found in the north of California coastline. A seasonal trend is also observed in stranded sea otters, where the average stranded counts decreases from spring, summer, autumn, to winter. Pups are especially more susceptible to stranding in spring and winter. Among the 6 types of threat (infection, disease, human disturbance, injury, poor condition, and predator), infection is the main threat posed to sea otter population, especially to younger otters (<= 3 years old). Specifically, acanthocephalan infection and T. gondii encephalitis are the leading primary causes of sea otter death. Furthermore, T. gondii encephalitis is the leading cause of death in males. Disease is another top threat, especially to older otters (>= 4 years old), and cardiac disease is found to be the leading cause of death in females. Emaciation is the leading contributing cause of death. While our result suggests that human disturbance poses the least threat, it is important to realize that our activities may lead to increased exposure of pathogens and protozoans to the otters, leading to massive infection. We should prioritze our conservational efforts in evaluating and containing the sources of pathogens near coastline and increase natural filter of watershed runoff. Also, though there are only a few deaths that are caused by human disturbances in our analysis, human distrubances are more often primary causes rather than contributing causes of death. Therefore, these disturbances, especially boat strike (the most common cause of death in human disturbance category), should be reduced to help increase the population size.
